
TODO: remove lower left Ct from first photo
TODO: remove lower left Ct from second photo?  Or not?

# Order and chaos

The Grand Canyon balances an upper beautiful symmetry strata
by

This ages might almost have contrived this arrangement
as to ? the regulations of the National Park.
Day hikers who whose day hikes take them only to the Tonto Platform
as far as Plateau Point
enjoy the sleek horizontal rationality of the upper strata,
while hikers who disregard the warnings
and pass beneath the Tonto Platform
find themselves ,
chaos and old night





is denied the easy rationalnitiy fo
hoirzontal color-coded layers:
the final X ft of vertical descent to the river
is a wilderness of twisting granite and schist


The day hiker from the South Rim
the hiker has perceived two realms of Grand Canyon geology:
a bright high world of ordered horizontal strata on top,
and a dark writhing subterranean basement underneath.

Geologists claim to discern more than a dozen strata
between the rim and Plateau Point,
but the casual hiker is likely to pick out
the two great cliff-forming formations
as landmarks during his descent.
They stand as the two most prominent bands of color
when the hiker looks back from Plateau Point:

PIC

Looking down from the rim,
it can almost appear as though the high white $Pc cliffs are larger,
but the mighty $Mr cliffs stand nearly twice as high.

But the $Ct doesn’t merely serve as the platform for PP.
It’s a mighty cliff-forming layer of its own,
as is clear enough once the hiker at Plateau Point turns to look east:

PIC

This view across Pipe Creek’s drainage —
the Colorado River itself is in the shadowed chasm far to the left —
is dominated by two final rock layers.
The $Ct serves not only as the foundation
of the wide Tonto Platform that you can see stretching behind it,
but at its edge — as here — becomes a cliff-forming unit of its own.

What lies beneath it?

The layers below
hikes under, not recommended

The Tapeats are, strictly speaking, the bottom stratum in this vista.
The further rocks below are not organized as strata,
but granites and schists
that were morphed into writhing pillars flutes etc
long ages ago.

Thus the Canyon balances order and chaos:
above,
its benignly horizontal strata, with convenient color coding;
below, a twisting metamorphosis of ancient rock.

Any hiker bold enough to disregard
river
passes from bright reason rationality
to dark chaos below.


GU
